Title: Beyond Optimists and Pessimists - Looking for Better Stories on Sustainability
Authors: Levien van Zon
Date: 2024-03-30
Tags: storytelling
Slug: beyond-optimists-and-pessimists

Reading time: ca. 20 minutes

*This article is also available as [PDF]({static}/offline/sustainsubstance-20240330-beyond-optimists-and-pessimists.pdf) or ebook ([EPUB]({static}/offline/sustainsubstance-20240330-beyond-optimists-and-pessimists.epub) and [Kindle]({static}/offline/sustainsubstance-20240330-beyond-optimists-and-pessimists.azw3)) for offline reading.
This is a draft version (revision 3), the final version will be published on [https://lvzon.substack.com](https://lvzon.substack.com) and here on [http://sustainsubstance.org](http://sustainsubstance.org).*

-----

**By Levien van Zon**


As a lover of books, I enjoy going into bookstores. I love to check out
new releases on all kinds of subjects. But when it comes to one of my
main interests, sustainability, I often find the offering of writings on
the subject somewhat disappointing. There are many excellent and
important books on all aspects of sustainability. Yet, something always
feels wrong. It somehow feels as if we\'re stuck. Half of the stories I
see seem too optimistic, and the other half too pessimistic. We seem to
be moving forward only very haltingly, at least when it comes to
important collective insights. The dominant stories on how humanity
should proceed all seem to be somewhat broken. And more crucially, they
contradict each other in important ways.

### Modernists, romantics and pessimists

There exists quite a large diversity in thinking and writing on
sustainability. Attempts at categorisation always seem somewhat
arbitrary. Nonetheless, let\'s look at one particular way of
categorising some of the major points of view on sustainability. One
important way of thinking treats sustainability as mostly a set of
technical or behavioural problems. In this view, technology X or Y or
some small change in our behaviour will fix everything. We'll call this
the \"ecomodernist\" point of view. Then there are ideas on how
everything is connected and on how modernity has messed things up. These
usually suggest that we should put more trust in nature and in small
communities, and less in technology and in human institutions. We can
think of this as the \"antimodernist\" or \"neo-romantic\" point of
view. Finally, there are quite a few stories on how we\'re all doomed
because of climate change, and on how only drastic and immediate action
can keep humanity from going extinct soon. We'll call this
\"ecopessimism\".

Usually we choose a point of view based on our existing beliefs and our
preferences. If you want to believe that technology can solve most of
our problems, you will probably prefer an \"ecomodernist\" view.
Probably you will also believe additional things, which are connected to
this. For instance \"progress\" is a very powerful idea, and economic
growth can help stabilise societies and drive innovation, as long as the
negative side-effects of economic activity can be kept in check. There
is probably some merit to these ideas. However, you may also be overly
optimistic about the future and the things that technology can do. And
you may underestimate the myriad ways in which the complexities of the
real world may sabotage even the best-laid plans and the most advanced
technologies.

If you prefer to believe that nature is superior to anything that we
humans tend to come up with, you will probably be partial to
\"neo-romanticism\". You may share my opinion that nature and
long-standing cultural traditions aren\'t \"backward\". Rather, looking
at natural evolution and traditional culture can be very useful, as this
may provide us with robust, time-tested solutions to some of our modern
problems. However, you may also believe that everything that is natural
tends to be \"good\". And even if you don\'t, you may assign agency and
purpose to nature in ways that don\'t match our current understanding of
how natural processes operate.

Finally, if you believe that humankind is basically digging its own
grave, you will probably tend toward \"ecopessimism\". You will
recognise that infinite growth is impossible given finite resources,
that technology tends to have negative side-effects and that both of
these can eventually destabilise societies. However, you may
underestimate the resilience of both natural and social systems and
their capacity to adapt when put under pressure. Moreover you will
probably experience a constant feeling of urgency, and many of your
expectations for the future will be built on fear. This may lead to
anxiety and depression.

People like Bill Gates, as well as many economists, engineers,
politicians and CEOs tend toward the ecomodernist perspective, claiming
that the combination of technology and "green" economic growth is the
way forward. People who put more trust in nature, community or
spirituality often tend toward neo-romanticism. They propose that a
sustainable future requires a "holistic" worldview, and local,
small-scale and often low-tech solutions. This view is common in
permaculture communities, ecovillages and similar places. And an example
of ecopessimism can be found in movements such as Extinction Rebellion,
that push for drastic reduction of carbon emissions now, to prevent
complete climate collapse.

### Wizard, prophet or both?

I\'m oversimplifying. It is true that we tend to subscribe to viewpoints
that match our existing beliefs and preferences. We also listen more
favourably to ideas and opinions that are common in the social groups
that we belong to. But things aren\'t as rigid as they seem. Humans are
very good at believing multiple things at the same time, even if these
are not mutually consistent. We're able to switch between these various
viewpoints and beliefs, sometimes very rapidly.

Charles C. Mann, in his excellent book *The Wizard and The Prophet*,
writes that he tends to oscillate between seeing things from two
contradictory perspectives. One he calls the *wizard* perspective, based
on the belief that the way forward is in growth and technological fixes.
The other is the *prophet* perspective, based on the belief that we need
to reduce our consumption and our population growth. One day, his views
are those of the wizard, another day he feels more like a prophet, and
some days he simply doesn\'t know. This is probably true for many of us.

### The importance of stories

There are of course many more and more nuanced views on sustainability
than just the extremes of *wizards* and *prophets*, or of ecomodernist,
neo-romantic or ecopessimist. I use these as examples to illustrate a
point: stories are important. They determine at least in part how we
tend to see and act in the world. All stories, however, simplify things,
and this can end up blinding us to certain aspects of the world.

In practice, there exists a diversity of viewpoints and explanatory
stories, within a society and even within our heads. This diversity is
good in many ways, but it can also confuse us, and it can sabotage or
slow down effective action. It can even interfere with the
identification of what the important problems are that need solving.

![]({static}/images/no-more-reality-150dpi.jpg)

When talking about stories, we usually think of *fiction*, but this is
not what I mean. Stories, in a broader sense, are models of the world
that are based on language (including visual and other non-linguistic
languages). What we call fiction is just one example of storytelling.
Fictional stories are important, they are about aspects of the world
that interest or entertain us. A *nonfiction* story is an attempt to
describe a part of the world. The attempt doesn't necessarily yield an
*accurate* description, though.

Stories can be seen as models of the world, but they are not merely
descriptive. Most stories, whether fiction or nonfiction, are also
normative. They don't just portray the world as it is, they also show
how we think it should be. Our stories are intimately tied up with our
values, the things that we find important. They are also tied up with
our goals, the things that we strive for. Stories help determine how we
look at the world and how we talk about it. Furthermore they help to
determine how we act in it and how we think others should act.

### Story clashes

Stories can describe different aspects of the world on different levels.
For instance, some stories are mostly functional, while others are more
emotional. Some try to explain the world as it is, while others are more
about articulating or reinforcing values, or about finding meaning.
These different stories can coexist in our heads and are not always
consistent with each other. In fact they rarely are. And though all
stories simplify, often they simplify too much.

For almost as long as I remember, I\'ve been fascinated by what we now
call sustainability. As a young boy in the 1980s I worried over the
uncertain future facing panda bears, rhinos and elephants. I saw how
organisations such as Greenpeace directed our attention to industrial
pollution. I witnessed in wonder how some governments thought it a good
idea to dump nuclear waste into the ocean. I was a teenager during the
optimistic 1990s, when the Cold War had ended, Western economies were
doing well and some people predicted \"the end of history\". All
humanity\'s problems were to be speedily resolved by the free market. As
I studied Environmental Science, \"the environment\" was rapidly going
out of fashion. It seemed, indeed, that most environmental problems had
been reduced to technical issues, to be solved by better technology and
better management. At the opening of the new millennium, I became
fascinated by the upcoming science of complex systems. People around me
started paying more attention to climate change, with many arguing that
there was, in fact, no such thing. While I was working on my Master's
degree in Theoretical Biology, worries about the future resurfaced.
Increasingly people were talking about sustainability and climate. And
as I write this, climate change is rapidly becoming a reality for many.
Sustainability has grown from a fringe interest of activists and
academics to one of the major issues discussed in politics and society
at large.

Still, most books, articles and talks on sustainability talk about \"the
environment\" as something out there. Something that needs to be fixed,
protected or saved in one way or the other. Discussions about
sustainability often seem either technical or superficial, or both. For
example, we talk about decoupling carbon emissions from economic growth.
We pretend that the \"planet will be saved\" by reducing plastic
packaging or electricity use. We talk about sustainability as \"meeting
the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs\". Oddly, we often fail to define
what exactly the most relevant needs of the present are, or the needs of
future generations, or the needs of other, non-human life forms.

There are certainly technical aspects to sustainability but it isn\'t
primarily a technical problem. It\'s an issue of values that touches at
the core of what it is to be human. We humans are probably the only
species on this planet that is able to make rational plans quite far
into the future. What do we want, as individuals, as families, as
communities, as societies, as a species, in the short term and in the
long term? Do we wish to spend our short lives accumulating as much as
possible at the expense of others? Most of us would probably answer this
with no. Do we want our species, our societies to grow exponentially
until resources run out and then crash, only to start growing again in
some kind of \"boom and bust\" pattern? Probably not. If we do not want
this future, why do many of our stories and our ideals not reflect our
wishes? One of our most common ideals is still to get rich, so we can
stop working and live comfortably. And our most common collective goal
is still to sustain economic growth.

The interesting thing about sustainability issues is that they will
always disappear, eventually. Unsustainable behaviour, by definition,
cannot last forever. We either fix it voluntarily, or it is forced to
stop at some point. The difficult question is: what will the collapse of
unsustainable behaviour take with it? How much damage are we willing to
incur? How do we recognise truly unsustainable behaviour before serious
damage is done? And are we willing and able to reduce the perceived
"needs" of the present, in order to allow for the needs of future
generations, or those of non-human species?

### What is sustainability anyway?

As we can see, it is not so easy to say what "sustainability" should be
about. It is perhaps easier to state what sustainability isn\'t. The
point of sustainability isn\'t to continue what we are doing at the
moment. It simply isn\'t realistically possible to keep our current
resource-intensive societies running indefinitely, not even if we\'d
manage to drastically reduce our use of resources and our emission of
waste products. And even if it were possible to continue current
practices, the question is whether we should want to. The current global
economic system isn\'t very good at providing everyone with their
necessities to lead a happy, healthy and stress-free life.

Sustainability also isn\'t about preventing human extinction. Even if
our most dire predictions will come true, we\'d most likely still
survive as a species. While it is certainly possible that some calamity
will drastically reduce the human population, humans have so far proven
to be quite a resilient bunch. Moreover, \"not going extinct\" is
setting the bar a little low, in my opinion. One would hope that we can
do better than that.

### Maintaining and improving wellbeing

So if our long-term goal isn\'t the continuation of current economies
and the preservation of our species, what could we be aiming for
instead? My proposal is to aim for continuing and improving the
*wellbeing* of both humans and other life-forms. Wellbeing may seem like
a vague concept, not much better than \"needs\". But as I will try to
show in this article series, the concept of wellbeing is a lot more
concrete than \"needs\" or even \"happiness\". Wellbeing is connected to
physical and mental health. It is, to some extent, the absence of
prolonged physical and mental stress. In a highly social species such as
humans, it is also connected to a healthy social environment, as well as
to our possibilities for self-realisation. Unfortunately we tend to
confuse wellbeing with things like comfort, freedom of choice and
\"welfare\" or individual wealth.

We should probably also aim to stabilise our societies. We might not
need to \"save\" the planet, but for our own sake we should stop
destroying or degrading our own life-support systems and the things in
the world that give us pleasure (which includes much of nature).
Probably few people would disagree with this goal. However, social
dynamics are rarely guided by rational thinking or common sense. Large
and complex societies have their own peculiar dynamics, which are
difficult to steer and may not always favour long-term stability. Still,
there is much room for improvement. And as we shall see, telling *better
stories* can play a role in this.

### Stories as simplifying models

As we saw, stories shape the way we see and understand the world. They
are about cause and effect and about which things are important.
Essentially, stories are simple toy-models of the world, or rather of
parts of the world. We build these models in our heads, and we can share
them with others, which is a kind of human superpower. Stories help us
to simplify the world, which is important because our brains can only
handle so much complexity. Stories give us a sense of identity and
purpose and they can help us set priorities.

We tend to prefer simple stories over complicated stories, because
simple stories make our lives easier. They can specify which categories
of things are \"good\" or \"bad\". This then helps us seek or avoid such
good and bad things. Examples of \"good vs. bad\" stories are not hard
to find. They clearly stand out in wartime propaganda, and in most
organised religions. But they are also common in other areas of daily
life, for instance in political views (e.g. \"wokes\" vs. moral
conservatives), dietary trends (ketogenic diets, veganism, paleo diets)
or economics (free markets vs. strong governments). Also the ways in
which we think about sustainability are full of "the bad" (flying,
eating meat) and "the good" (solar energy, buying local, organic
produce, travelling by train). Thinking in terms of good and bad is
attractive, it provides an easy shorthand for moral assessments. *Good
vs. bad* stories also provide a strong sense of shared values that link
us to our social groups.

Simple stories provide a feeling of certainty, and we much prefer
certainty over uncertainty and doubt. In fact, simplifying stories are
so important to us that we will defend them when they are challenged.
When we are confronted with evidence that contradicts our main
explanatory stories, we often choose to ignore it. Rather than question
our internal story, we actively go in search of evidence that will
support it, and we try to convince others that our stories are somehow
more \"true\" than theirs.

Stories can be big or small, they can construct utopian ideals for a
whole society or describe individuals recycling some of their waste.
Still, many stories share similarities in structure. One well-known
story arc is the *Hero\'s Journey.* One or more heroes must face and
overcome difficulties in order to help their people or loved ones. The
majority of Hollywood movies follow this story arc. All of us also
construct these types of stories in our heads, all the time. Most of us
want our lives to matter. We want to be the hero of our own life
stories, working toward some future goal. We want to be remembered when
we are gone. If our internal story lines and goals become so separated
from reality that we can no longer ignore the growing gap, we become
depressed, until we manage to define new goals or develop a new
storyline to give our lives renewed direction and meaning.

### Shared stories

As a group we construct collective stories to give direction to our
societies. One extreme example is the utopian story of Communism, which
promised to end inequality by getting rid of private property
altogether. A somewhat less extreme example can be found in the SDGs,
the Sustainable Development Goals. These broadly aim to increase
well-being for all humans and protect the lives of non-human species. In
fact, the concept of \"development\" or \"progress\" is in itself a
shared story, and a fairly useful one, although it is not without
problems. We will examine these problems later, in a separate article.

As I said before, all stories are simplifications. This in itself isn\'t
a problem. It can become a problem, however, when we forget or ignore
the fact that our stories are simplifications. The story of Communism
was a simplification. Communist utopia never became a reality and would
probably never come. In fact, many Communist leaders were perfectly
aware of this. Yet they stuck to the story, because it was useful. It
provided a common goal, at least in theory. It also provided a shared
identity which, for a while at least, kept Communist and socialist
societies together. The story of Capitalism is a similar kind of
simplification. In his well-known book *Sapiens*, the author and
historian Yuval Noah Harari calls such stories \"shared fictions\". In
his view, ideologies such as Communism and Capitalism are shared
fictions, as are all religions, and even things such as \"money\", \"the
government\", \"the law\" or \"the economy\". Shared fictions are
concepts and stories that we collectively believe in and that therefore,
through our collective actions, have real power in the world. Shared
fictions can also lose their power if we stop believing in them, as when
currencies collapse again and again throughout history. However, as long
as they persist, shared fictions are very powerful tools to coordinate
collective action within human societies. Humans are storytelling
animals, it is our superpower. It is also the cause of much suffering
and many problems.

Shared stories are very hard to change, because they are distributed
over a great many minds. Moreover, our shared stories are tied up with
our shared identities. This is important for binding people together
within a society. But it can also cause us to drift apart, because we
contrast our identities with \"others\" outside the social groups we
identify with. This can result in polarisation between groups in a
society, which in the best case can sabotage collective coordinated
action required to solve large-scale problems. In the worst case it can
lead to extreme violence between \"tribes\" of people who base their
identity on different stories, different ways of seeing the world and
their place in it.

### Blind spots

Even if our collective stories don\'t lead to polarisation or violence,
they can be problematic. They help us to understand and navigate the
world, but they also blind us to the parts of the world that do not fit
the storyline. Our stories lead us to collectively focus on certain
problems and connected kinds of solutions. Sometimes this is
counterproductive, especially if we try to apply simple stories to
situations that are complex, and even more so if we do this on a large
scale. An example is the relentless focus on \"efficiency\", which has
come to dominate much of our global thinking, especially in the 20th
century. Thinking in terms of efficiency can be useful, and has proven
very powerful in shaping the modern world. But making a system more
efficient tends to reduce its diversity and its resilience, which almost
always causes problems in the long run. A very obvious example is the
production of food through large-scale monocultures. This is very
efficient, at least in terms of product yield per hectare or acre. But
obtaining such high yields generally requires large-scale application of
fuel, fertiliser, irrigation water and pesticides. Moreover, many of the
techniques of modern agriculture have negative effects on the quality of
agricultural soils. Consequently, yields have become increasingly
sensitive to shortages of water and fertiliser, and to high fuel prices,
bad weather and the appearance of new pests. Continuing this trend is
unlikely to achieve long-term sustainability. Yet there is a tendency in
\"ecomodernist\" stories to emphasise the need for further increase in
agricultural efficiency in order to \"feed the world\" without expanding
agricultural land. At first glance this seems like a sensible idea, but
like all stories it\'s a simplification that ignores some important
complexities of the real world. While it can help solve some problems,
it can make other problems worse.

### Better stories

The question is, is this really the best we can do? Do we really have to
choose between technological optimism or environmental pessimism? I
think that we can do better, and I\'m not the only one. However, when
thinking and talking about sustainability, *we do need better stories*.
If we are to truly address the difficult problems of long-term
well-being, wishful thinking will be insufficient. We cannot simply
believe that technology or better education or \"going back to nature\"
will fix everything. Equally it won\'t help us to believe that our
problems are too big to be solved, or that the best solution is the
extinction of all humans.

It\'s important to realise that our stories aren\'t just explanations
and problem solving tools, they are also meaning-making tools and self
protection devices, used by people to feel good about themselves. They
help determine what we want, how we want it and what we\'re willing to
give up. Most people want sustainability, but they also want growth (as
a perceived part of \"progress\"), so we prefer \"magic bullet\"
solutions to ones that actually require effort or sacrifice. These magic
bullet solutions have shifted through time: from machines to \"science\"
to rational planning to computers to \"the market\" to cryptocurrencies
and the blockchain to artificial intelligence. Besides this, most people
want to feel that they\'re the hero that is \"saving the world\" in some
way. Unfortunately most of the real problems we face do not require an
individual to \"save the world\". Instead they require hard work done
collectively by many, many groups of people, who need to coordinate
locally, regionally and globally to analyse and solve many small
problems, preferably without causing a lot of new problems in the
process. Much of this work is already being done by people somewhere and
we can learn from their experiences and scale up our collective effort
on things that really work.

In this series of articles I will look for better stories. Over the
years, many people have come up with different, somewhat
non-conventional ways of looking at and talking about sustainability,
about the nature of our main problems and the direction of possible
solutions. I believe that some of these ideas are useful, and may inform
more productive ways of thinking and talking. They may help us build
better stories.

### Science as starting point

Science of course is one tool that may help us. The neat thing about
science is that it provides a toolbox for testing if our explanatory
stories are useful, based on observations and experiments. The stories
of science are often the best explanations we have for how the world
works. Still, these stories of science are necessarily simplifications,
that may be inaccurate and may miss important aspects of the world. And
scientific stories describing complex realities rarely offer single or
simple explanations. Rather they offer sets of likely alternatives. As
with all stories, when offered a choice between alternatives, we tend to
pick the explanations that suit us best. Still, at least the explanatory
stories of science constantly evolve as new observations are made and
some explanations are shown to be incomplete or incorrect. Therefore, it
is to science that we shall turn first. Specifically in the next
articles we will look at the fairly young science of complex systems. We
will also examine some reasons why biological life is so robust that it
has managed not just to survive but to flourish, despite several truly
cataclysmic events that occurred over the long history of our planet.

-----

Do you want to be notified when future articles in this series are published? Subscribe to my [Substack](https://lvzon.substack.com/), or follow me on [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/sustainsubstance), [Bluesky](https://bsky.app/profile/lvzon.bsky.social) or [Twitter/X](https://twitter.com/levienvanzon). You can also subscribe to our [Atom-feed](/feeds/all.atom.xml).

*Image credit: [Bigoudis](https://www.bigoudis.org)*


### Further reading

Storr, Will. *The Science of Storytelling: Why Stories Make Us Human and How to Tell Them Better*. Abrams, 2020.     
<https://www.thescienceofstorytelling.com/>

Gottschall, Jonathan. *The Storytelling Animal: How Stories Make Us Human*. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2012.      
<https://www.jonathangottschall.com/storytelling-animal>

Mann, Charles C. *[The Wizard and the Prophet](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/220698/the-wizard-and-the-prophet-by-charles-c-mann/): Two Remarkable Scientists and Their Dueling Visions to Shape Tomorrow's World*. Alfred A. Knopf, 2018.     

Kallis, Giorgos. *Limits: Why Malthus Was Wrong and Why Environmentalists Should Care*. Stanford University Press, 2019.      
<https://www.sup.org/books/title/?id=29999>     
Giorgos Kallis makes the important point that limits should probably be
chosen voluntarily by society based on values, rather than waiting for
limits to be imposed by our environment.

Damasio, Antonio. *[Feeling and Knowing](https://www.hachette.co.uk/titles/antonio-damasio/feeling-and-knowing/9781472147332/): Making Minds Conscious*. Hachette UK, 2021.     
In this short book, neuroscientist Antonio Damasio argues that feelings
and consciousness arose in humans and other animals to help us determine
how well our life process is going, and to act on that information. We
all seek wellbeing, because a feeling of wellbeing signals that all is
well, while feelings of stress or pain signal that there may be a
problem.

Harari, Yuval Noah. *Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind*. Random House, 2014.     
<https://www.ynharari.com/book/sapiens-2/>

Vandermeer, John. [*The Ecology of Agroecosystems*](https://books.google.com/books/about/The_Ecology_of_Agroecosystems.html). Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2011.     

Solnit, Rebecca. *'If You Win the Popular Imagination, You Change the Game': Why We Need New Stories on Climate*. The Guardian, January 12, 2023, sec. News.     
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2023/jan/12/rebecca-solnit-climate-crisis-popular-imagination-why-we-need-new-stories>

